---
title: "Pastor Aeternus and the 'Dignity of a Dogma'"
date: 2024-06-03
---

_Much of this post is based on ideas first expressed by Scott Smith <a href="https://reducedculpability.blog/2023/11/30/a-misidentified-dogma-misadventures-in-peer-review/" target="_blank">here</a> and <a href="https://reducedculpability.blog/2021/10/30/friends-dont-let-friends-accidentally-dogmatize-the-extreme-opinion-of-albert-pighius/" target="_blank">here</a>. This post differs from those slightly, in that (1) it is focused on addressing a <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XgbQmItXsi8" target="_blank">specific YouTube video</a>, (2) it provides a bit more Latin translation (and a small correction to one piece of the Latin in Scott's posts -- Smith has "in nullo **esse** licet" where the Latin is actually "in nullo **casu** licet"), and (3) it is arranged in an order that better fits my purposes._

## Thesis

In <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XgbQmItXsi8" target="_blank">this YouTube video</a>, at around <a href="https://www.youtube.com/live/XgbQmItXsi8?si=jbcAXgdGYFFj2BhA&t=1707" target="_blank">28:27</a>, Emmett O'Regan says that the fourth proposition presented by Bellarmine in Book 4, Chapter **VI**, of De Romano Pontifice is the one that Bishop Gasser, in his relatio concerning the document Pastor Aeternus, says is going to be raised to the level of a dogma. But that seems clearly wrong. There are other occasions where Bellarmine numbers propositions, including a fourth one, and it actually appears that Gasser is saying that one of those *other* "fourth propositions" of Bellarmine is being raised to the level of a dogma. In other words, O'Regan seems to be mistaken about what Gasser is referencing. I'll explain.

## The "Fourth View" of Bellarmine

### Five Attributes of the Fourth View Being Promoted: Certissima, Asserenda, Communissima, Certa, and Corrected by Bellarmine

In his relatio, Gasser says that the new dogma being defined in Pastor Aeternus "is one and the same which Bellarmine teaches in the place cited by the reverend speaker [Bishop David Moriarty, as we'll see below] and which Bellarmine adduces in the fourth place and calls most certain and assured [certissimam et asserendam], or rather, correcting himself, the most common and certain [communissimam et certam] opinion." So, what view exactly is Gasser referring to here as the view that "Bellarmine adduces in the fourth place?" Well, we see immediately from the quote that it is one that Bellarmine calls "**most certain and assured [certissimam et asserendam]**," and also one on which he **corrects himself**, saying that it is actually "**the most common and certain [communissimam et certam]**." Now, here is the difficulty for O'Regan: the fourth proposition in Book 4, Chapter **VI**, which O'Regan seems to think is the one Gasser is referring to -- that "the Supreme Pontiff is not only not able to err as Pontiff but that even as a particular person he is not able to be heretical, by pertinaciously believing something contrary to the faith" -- is one that Bellarmine only refers to as one that "can be believed probably and piously." Instead, he clearly refers to a *different* fourth view with the exact adjectives used by Gasser, and he does so in Chapter **II**, not Chapter VI, of Book 4 of De Romano Pontifice.

### The Matching View is Found in Chapter II, not Chapter VI, of Book 4 (Part 1): Certissima and Asserenda

Let's first look at what Bellarmine says in Chapter II of Book 4. In that chapter, he writes the following:

"With such things being laid out, only four different opinions remain. . . .

"3) [I'm including this because it is the view that the Pope can neither be a heretic nor publicly teach heresy, which Bellarmine identifies as the view of Pighius:] The Third opinion is on another extreme, that the Pope cannot in any way be a heretic nor publicly teach heresy, even if he alone should define some matter, as Albert Pighius says.

"4) The fourth opinion is that in a certain measure, whether the Pope can be a heretic or not, he cannot define a heretical proposition that must be believed by the whole Church in any way. . . .

"From these four opinions, . . . [t]he fourth is **most certain and must be asserted [certissima est et asserenda].**”

These are the same adjectives -- "certissima" and "asserenda" -- that Gasser used in his relatio when he says that "the doctrine in the proposed chapter . . . is one and the same which Bellarmine . . . adduces in the fourth place and calls **most certain and assured [certissimam et asserendam].**" It's a direct match.

### The Matching View is Found in Chapter II, not Chapter VI, of Book 4 (Part 2): Communissima and Certa (and Bellarmine Correcting Himself)

That's one thing. Now, what about the rest of what Gasser says, i.e., the part concerning Bellarmine correcting himself and using the adjectives "communissimam" et "certam?" Did Bellarmine do that with respect to this fourth opinion found in Chapter II?

As a matter of fact, he did *exactly* that. In the quote above from Chapter II of his book, Bellarmine had called this fourth view a certain and assured "**most common [communissima]** *opinion*." He later wrote, correcting himself: "This 'opinion' is **more rightly** the common *judgment* of Catholics; for 'opinion' implies uncertainty, and we hold this judgement to be **certain.**" (I have not located the Latin for this text, but the English version is found in Cardinal Manning's "The Oecumenical Council and the Infallibility of the Roman Pontiff"; the word for "certain" in the Latin was almost surely a case of **certa**, or, at the very least, a synonym for that word.) In other words, Bellarmine corrected himself concerning the fourth view in Chapter II of Book 4, in order to emphasize that he what he had called an opinion was in fact **"communisima" (common)** and **"certa" (certain)**. Those are exactly the other two adjectives that Gasser used. And Gasser says the view of Pastor Aeternus is "one and the same with" that view. So, this is the view that has *exactly* all of the attributes that Gasser identified.

### The Matching View is Found in Chapter II, not Chapter VI, of Book 4 (Part 3): The Citation of the "Reverend Speaker"

"Okay," you may be asking yourself, "but Gasser *also* says that the view of Pastor Aeternus is the same view that is taught by Bellarmine 'in the place cited by the reverend speaker.' Who is this "reverend speaker," and what exactly did he cite from Bellarmine?"

It's a good question. Fortunately, the answer is readily at hand, and it corroborates everything said above. We need only look into the context immediately prior to the part of Gasser's relatio that we've already quoted.

In that part of the relatio, Gasser says that "the reverend speaker," after reading the Vatican Council's draft of Pastor Aeternus, had objected that this document would make the **"extreme"** view of Albert Pighius a dogma. Now, looking through the council's acts, we find that it was Bishop David Moriarty who said this (see also Washburn 2020, "Pastor Aeternus, Liberalism, and the Limits of Papal Authority," p. 124, where he also identifies Moriarty as the speaker in question). For Moriarty had said the following: "If, therefore, the Pontiff is infallible, because he is in no case able to separate himself from the foundation [i.e., from the divine foundation of the Church, by committing heresy], I think the opinion of Albert Pighius must be embraced, which is called **'extreme'**" (this is my own translation of the original Latin, which reads as follows: "Si ideo infallibilis pontifex, quia in nullo casu licet se separare a fundamento, sentio amplectendam esse sententiam, quae vocatur **extrema** Albert Pighii.") Moriarty, in other words, had objected that Pastor Aeternus would dogmatize Pighius' view, and he had said this view was "called extreme" ("vocatur extrema"). Now, by whom was it called extreme? By Bellarmine, of course, as we have already seen above (when we cited Bellarmine addressing Pighius' view as the third of four views). In saying this is a view of Pighius that is "called extreme," Moriarty is referring to the passage where Bellarmine in fact calls the view of Pighius an "extreme opinion": "The Third opinion is on another extreme . . . Thus [goes the view of] Albert Pighius" (Latin: "Tertia sententia est in alio **extremo** . . . Ita Albertus Pighius."). Now, *where exactly* does Bellarmine describe this view in such terms? It is once again in Book **II** (not Book VI!) of Chapter 4 of Bellarmine's work, where Bellarmine says (to quote again), "The Third opinion is on another **extreme**, that the Pope cannot in any way be a heretic nor publicly teach heresy, even if he alone should define some matter, as Albert Pighius says." So, this "reverend speaker" is also referring to the view described by Bellarmine in Chapter II, identified above, and not to Chapter VI.

But that's not all. Gasser's *own* comments in response to this "reverend speaker" *also* show clearly that the speaker (Moriarty) *cannot* be citing the the "fourth proposition" that O'Regan is citing from Chapter VI of Bellarmine's work. Addressing the speaker's objection (just described), Gasser says that Bellarmine's view on Pighius' opinion is "clear from the very words of Bellarmine, **both** in the citation made by the reverend speaker [Bishop Moriarty] **and** also from Bellarmine himself who, in book 4, chapter **VI**, pronounces on the opinion of Pighius." Note the "both . . . and . . . " here. Gasser is saying that Bellarmine's opinion on Pighius is clear in *two places*: *first*, in the words cited by the reverend speaker; and *second*, in Chapter VI of Book 4 of Bellarmine's work. But this means that what the reverend speaker, Moriarty, cited is something *other than* Chapter VI of Book 4 of Bellarmine's work! Thus, when Gasser goes on to say explicitly that the view of Pastor Aeternus is "one and the same which Bellarmine teaches in the place cited by the reverend speaker [Bishop Moriarty] and which Bellarmine adduces in the fourth place and calls most certain and assured [certissimam et asserendam], or rather, correcting himself, the most common and certain [communissimam et certam] opinion," we can know once again that Chapter **VI** of Book 4 is *not* that view. It is *not* "the place cited by the reverend speaker," and so it seems that O'Regan is wrong to say that it is the one being raised to the dignity of a dogma.

### Quick Recap of Preceding Points

At this point, then, we now have various very strong lines of evidence demonstrating that what Gasser is saying is that the "one and the same" view explicated in Pastor Aeternus is in fact that fourth view explicated by Bellarmine in Chapter **II** of Book 4, *not* the fourth view explicated in Chapter **VI** of that book. To summarize, it is only in Chapter II that (1) Bellarmine identifies a "fourth" view as "certissima" and "asserenda," (2) Bellarmine later corrects himself on that same view, which he then identifies as "communissima" and "certa," -- in other words, this is the only spot where Bellarmine, to use Gasser's exact wording in his relatio, "adduces [a view] in the fourth place and calls [it] most certain and assured [certissimam et asserendam], or rather, correcting himself, the most common and certain [communissimam et certam] opinion"; it is the only spot where the descriptions exactly match -- and it is also the very same place that (3) has Bellarmine calling the view of Pighius "extreme" (which is how he was cited by the "reverend speaker" who objected that Pastor Aeternus would dogmatize Pighius' view, "called [by Bellarmine] extreme"). And since we know from the above examination of Gasser's own words that the reverend speaker was citing a portion of Bellarmine *other than* Chapter VI of Book 4, that also points us to this same part of Chapter II.

### The Matching View is Found in Chapter II, not Chapter VI, of Book 4 (Part 4): Gasser's Explicit Statement concerning Pighius

But one more thing. When Gasser actually *does* comment on Chapter VI of Book 4 of Bellarmine's work in this part of relatio, he says that "the opinion of Albert Pighius, which Bellarmine indeed calls pious and probable . . . in book 4, chapter VI, [is pronounced on by Bellarmine] in the following words: 'It can be believed probably and piously that the supreme Pontiff is not only not able to err as Pontiff but that even as a particular person he is not able to be heretical, by pertinaciously believing something contrary to the faith.'" But then he *immediately* continues: "From this, it appears that the doctrine in the proposed chapter is **not** that of Albert Pighius." In other words, he says that the doctrine being proposed is *not* the view that Bellarmine just described as pious and probable. But that is exactly the view O'Regan puts on the screen at the time mentioned above, as though it is the proposition Gasser is endorsing. The evidence strongly indicates that that is incorrect.

## Concluding Remarks

Per Gasser, the doctrine in the proposed chapter of Pastor Aeternus "is one and the same which Bellarmine teaches in the place cited by the reverend speaker [which is not Chapter VI of Book 4] and which Bellarmine adduces in the fourth place and calls most certain and assured, or rather, correcting himself, the most common and certain opinion." We have seen that this is the fourth position of Chapter II, which says, "The fourth opinion is that in a certain measure, whether the Pope can be a heretic or not, he cannot define a heretical proposition that must be believed by the whole Church in any way." This is the fourth opinion that exactly matches Gasser's description. *That* is the view, then, being raised to the dignity of a dogma in Pastor Aeternus. It is explicitly *not* the other view described by Bellarmine in Chapter VI -- the view that O'Regan puts on the screen, that "the Supreme Pontiff is not only not able to err as Pontiff but that even as a particular person he is not able to be heretical, by pertinaciously believing something contrary to the faith" -- for that view is identified with the position of Pighius by Gasser (it is "*the opinion of Pighius, which Bellarmine indeed calls pious and probable*"), right before Gasser says that the view of Pighius, i.e., this view, is *not* the view described in Pastor Aeternus.
